---
title: "Bonsai Metric Tree"
order: 3
published: false
excerpt: "[2020] Side project with a mission to create a SaaS tool for improved project planning and metric roll-ups"
classes: wide
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/bonsai/logo.png
sidebar:
  - title: "Role"
    text: "Technical Cofounder"
  - title: "Period"
    text: "2020"
---

This project spanned mid to late 2020 and was another idea initially dreamt up by 
<a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/jgarg/" target="_blank">Jay Garg</a>.

By this point in our careers we had both seen project planning done in a number of ways and the
common denominator was that they all seemed insufficient. There was a lack of **precision**,
**adaptability**, and **detail** in most planning processes, and we set out to solve this.

"Bonsai" was born shortly after as we imagined a "metric tree" that would enable you to break down
anything into its more basic components so that you could estimate those simpler components and have
it compute the final top-level result. You can't improve something that you can't measure, and
almost anything worth solving can be measured in some way. The easiest things to measure or estimate
are typically simpler and at the bottom of the tree you're thinking about. Based on these
assumptions, we solved for **precision** by making everything about numbers, specifically the low-level
numbers or the "leaves" of the tree.

We solved for **adaptability** by making it so that you could add a new leaf node anywhere or change any
values at any time. Once you did that, the tree would be recomputed where necessary to reflect the
new values. Plans change all the time and this was our way to ensure that we can always adjust our
understanding of the metrics based on new estimates or insights.

To add an extra level of **detail**, we had planned to solve for cases where a number of projects
could affect any number of nodes outcomes. For example, you could define a project "A" that affects
node 1 by 10% and node 2 by 5% and a project "B" that affects node 3 by 20%. If your team could only
choose one project to do between the two of them, being able to see the final outcome for either
project would make for a quick comparison and decision. Of course, all of this is assuming that your
baseline estimates and percentages of impact are correct in the first place, which becomes the new
challenge. As tough as those details are to get right, we found that better than sticking a wet
finger in the air and saying "the wind is blowing this way".

Here is what the product ended up looking like:
[![Bonsai metric tree simple example](/assets/images/bonsai/ex_tree.png)](/assets/images/bonsai/ex_tree.png)

As we got to exploring how we could build such a thing, it quickly became clear where the major
obstacles would be. Spoiler alert: the tree (duh). The nodes were going to be relatively simple
(React) components. We determined that we could have a single node be considered "active" at any
time and have that node's configuration open for editing in the side panel. Simple enough. We soon
realized, however, that we didn't have the slightest clue about how to render a tree of said nodes,
never mind dynamically re-shaping all of it on the fly. "Re-shaping" here means automatic node
repositioning, and it was critical to us as we didn't see much use in a tool that required you to
manually reposition nodes each time you made a change that disrupted the balance or visual spacing
of the tree.

We had scoured the web at the time for a pre-made solution that would get us at least partway there
as we knew it wasn't going to be trivial to build, but nothing really fit what we needed. The
closest we got were some solutions that provided a dynamic tree with extremely limited ability to
adapt what was in each node. As tempting as those solutions were at first, early testing convinced
me that trying to repurpose them for our use-case was going to be even more frustrating and
time-consuming than figuring out how to build our own in the long run.

Despite not having much of a lead at the time, we made the hard decision to focus intently back on
how ***we*** would solve it if forced, so we revisited our problem with fresh eyes. It's amazing
sometimes what you find or what you become capable of when there are no other options. I couldn't
believe it when I found this paper called <a href="https://www.cs.unc.edu/techreports/89-034.pdf"
target="_blank">A Node-Positioning Algorithm for General Trees</a> written by John Q. Walker II. As
you can probably tell from the title, it was exactly what we needed (at least on paper), and all I
had to do was adapt our own algorithm from it â€“ easier said than done.

It took several nights of hard work but I did successfully adapt the algorithm for our
purposes, and that was ultimately what powered our ability to re-shape our trees automatically. Here
it is in action: <br/><br/>**TODO: insert large GIF demo of tree positioning**

SVG Paths were what enabled us to draw precise lines connecting the tree nodes once they were
positioned. Looking back now, I'm quite surprised that all of the line-drawing code is less than 200
tidy lines, including two React components' worth of boilerplate. Most of it is some light math
wrapped around the `svg` and `path` elements. The hardest part here was probably realizing what was
even possible with HTML and SVG in the first place: as it turns out, quite a bit! Enabling the
rounded corners for paths leading to edge nodes was the final cherry on top.

The rest of the tech stack was fairly simple as our main goal was to launch a proof of concept:
<br/>Django, Python, React, Docker, GCP

Once we had the rendering and repositioning working, we quickly added in other features like the
ability to set a mathematical operator for a parent node so that it knew how to auto-calculate its
own value by applying that operator on the values of its children. It was around this time that I
was reminded of the perils of <a href="{% post_url 2024-07-01-floating-point-arithmetic %}"
target="_blank"> floating point arithmetic</a>.

We finally had our "metric tree" tool and it seemed like it could be generalized for a variety of
uses. Here is a slightly more complex example that shows how a metric tree might be used to model
annual recurring revenue (ARR) for a product with different tiers of subscription:

[![Bonsai metric tree ARR example](/assets/images/bonsai/arr_example.png)](/assets/images/bonsai/arr_example.png)

In the end, we didn't garner enough attention or see enough usage from any end-user candidates to
suggest that it was worth pursuing, but it was clear that we were learning from our earlier
mistakes. While it took us years to recognize a failure to launch the first time, it only took us
months with this project. We also built something much less broad but in many ways far more complex
and unique than what we had built before, which was a good place to be for prototyping.

<!--
With permission from John Q. Walker II, whose foundational work made this project possible, I have
since published the core logic behind our tree positioning package as open source under a very
permissive license. It will proudly carry the name of this original project forward with it, and you
can check it out at <a href="https://github.com/sudotliu/bonsai" target="_blank">Bonsai</a>.

# TODOs
- open source code, pending response from UNC re: license
    - update repo README with blog post link
-->